---
layout: post
title:  "What Do We Dream Of?"
date:   2018-04-18 15:11:29 +0800
tag: essays
---


Although the technology has helped humans to better understand the functionality of dreams, dreams still puzzle philosophers and artists since antiquity. The Hollywood blockbuster movie Inception promoted the concept of constructing a imaginary dream world and showed how the dream world is capable of controlling the reality. However, this topic of illusions and reality has been long ago addressed by other peers in the film industry. Amongst the film masters, Satoshi Kon is one of the most brilliant, avant-garde animation director. Paprika elaborates the interaction between dreams and reality helps the understanding of people’s identities and discloses the pressed side of the society; Millennium Actress utilizes film production to mirror the protagonist’s change of state and bolster her determination through her changing roles in different films. HIs films elicit the questions of morality, identity and the ontology of dreams. The interaction between dreams and reality helps the understanding of people's’ identities and discloses the repressed side of the society.

In Christopher Nolan’s film Inception, the protagonist Cobb loses the sense of discriminate his dreams from the reality. Cobb suffers from separation from the family and his wife Mal’s suicide, both resulted from the overexploitation of the dream device, out of his curiosity and greed. Staying in the dream world for too long, Cobb has begun to confuse his dream with the real world. The dream device exposes the hidden personality of Cobb. On the outside, Cobb is a character of conceit and executive power. He can cleverly put together a team with the best chemistry and efficiency; he is also a wonderful lobbyist who successfully convinced his potential employer to obtain an opportunity to return home. Nonetheless, under the almighty, leadership figure Cobb presents to the world, Cobb in the dream world, appears to be hysterical and hopeless. He cannot escape the nightmare of his wife’s death, and she keeps haunting him in his dream. Due to the absence of a loyal figure for Cobb, he lacks a sense of belonging, and therefore, he is willing to risk anything for a reunion with his two children. As a result, Cobb chooses to keep exploiting the dream device to perform extremely dangerous mission and lost in between the edge of dream and reality.

Inception has received many criticisms for the lack of character development and emotions, but Nolan responded: “I try not to be obvious about it…I seem to be making films that serve as Rorschach tests.” (Whipp, 2018) Rorschach tests uses random, symmetrical inkblots to test and analyze the subjects’ perception. In other words, Nolan claimed that lack of emotions is deliberately designed for His dream world is a perfect representation of his film style. Inception is similar to a Mathematician writing a paper to find the relationship between dreams and reality and how one interacts with each other. The design of layered dreams and waking up from one another is similar to the concept of derivatives and integrals in calculus, which you would need one to derive the other while they are two distinctive concepts. As the “Penrose stairs” shown in the movie by Arthur, the stairs from dreams to reality are infinite, there is no beginning and end and it would be pointless to locate the beginning or end.

Inception happens to share many similarities with the Japanese animated film Paprika by Satoshi Kon in their usage of technology and contrast between the dream world and reality. In fact, many even argue that the latter is regarded as the source of inspiration for the former. For example, the usage of mirrors is incorporated in both Inception and Paprika to illustrate how the dream world reflects the reality. In Inception, in the scene where architect Ariadne experiments with her illusions in the dream under the guidance of Cobb, she cleverly juxtaposes two giant mirrors opposite to each other and by breaking one of the mirrors, she successfully extends the road and the buildings to infinity. Similarly, Paprika discovers the edge of her dream and breaks the mirror that reflects the imaginary dream world. These mirrors signifies that one unconsciously and spontaneously reflects his or her repressed emotions and ego.
Nevertheless, compared to Inception which recounts the story from a limited aspect, Paprika is able to explore deeper psychological, moral and social issues by addressing the relationship between the dreams and real world and the derived application of Sigmund Freud’s theory of psychoanalysis and dream interpretation. Freud argues in his work “The Interpretations of Dreams” that “a dream is a (disguised) fulfilment of a (suppressed or repressed) wish.” Through the enquiry and analysis of the manifest, or literal content of dreams, people can conclude the latent content, or the symbolic, underlying true meaning of dreams. It is from the latent content that people disentangle dream’s meaning. (Freud and Strachey, 2010) Kon juxtaposes the real lives of the characters with their dreams for the audience to infer the latent content and understand the key struggles the characters are facing. The dual lives of three major characters: Detective Toshimi Konakawa, the Chairman, and Atsuko Chiba exposed their individual psychological problems. Towards the end of the film, their dreams converge into an aggregated mirroring of multiple people’s minds and eventually evolves into a shared representation of the society’s subconsciousness and ideology.

Detective Toshimi Konakawa is an example of a beneficiary of DC mini, a dream gadget. He receives psychotherapy from Paprika for recovering from his past trauma of his best friends’ death. The characterization of Konakawa is parallel to Cobb from Inception, who cannot confront nightmare of Mal in his subconscious. Despite Konakawa claims “movies don’t interest me” (Kon, Paprika), interestingly, his dreams are consisted of a compilation of Roman Holiday(1953), From Russia with Love (1963), the Tarzan series, and The Greatest Show on Earth (1952), and random usage of film jargons such as “line of action” and “Pan-focus” jumps up from his conversation with Paprika.(Ogg, 2009) Moreover, the mobs in his dreams share the same appearance as Konakawa, who can be seen as another representation of his hidden personality..

Detective Konakawa’s central conflict is shown in his recurring dream of the scene which Konakawa, as a police officer, points the gun towards a fugitive at hallway. The two most worth-noticing themes of his dreams are the act of betrayal in the circus when he is being arrested by his supposed colleagues and inability to resolve a case or a kind of emotion in being unable to fire the gun to the fugitive. Although Konakawa explains the recurring scene is due to the current homicide case he is working on, the reshowing of the scene can be interpreted as a manifestation of his source of underlying anxiety. The latent contents shown in people’s dreams have far greater significance than the manifest one in his work. (Freud and Strachey, 2010) His denial of his passion towards films indicates his self-deprecation and eager to find something that he can hold on to in real life to relieve from the blame.

The shooting scene showed up in the film three times. At the first two attempts, Konawaka is still deeply traumatized, so as he runs after the suspect, the entire hallway starts to collapse, implying his defensive mechanism unconsciously shuts down his dream to protect him. Because Konakawa didn’t complete the movie which he had made a promise to his best friend to finish, he regards this incompletion as an act of betrayal to his dearest friend. Therefore, Konakawa has been suffering from his powerlessness and guilt. So Konakawa subconsciously tries to seek for an outlet for his pain—¬¬his dreams. The unfinished film has haunted Konakawa and from his perspective, the object of films has become a specter of his incomplete ambition and unresolved friendship. After Paprika implied to Konakawa the fugitive may be “another himself”, the two Konakawas, his consciousness and subconsciousness, start to merge into one integral entity because the fugitive is his escapist ego. Luckily, professional analysis endows Konakawa with a thorough understanding of himself. Thus, Konakawa decides to embrace his hidden self.

Kerin Ogg argues in an academic journal that “we all dream in pan focus”, in a sense that modern people are heavily influenced and shaped by different forms of media, ranging from mythology, TV shows, literature, and certainly films. Detective Konakawa’s subconsciousness manifests not only his filmophile but also the significant influences from mass media. The pervasiveness of the culture, regardless of whether popular or classical, has substantially changed people’s morality and attitudes towards certain subjects. According to Freud’s model, human psyche is consisted of three parts: id, ego and super-ego. Id is the primitive trend, ego is the decision making component and super-ego balances the two. Freud believes that ego is modified by direct influence of the external world. In this case, living under the insurmountable influence of media, human egos have undergone huge, imperceptible transformation unconsciously and hence our values have also shaped by mass media.

As Konakawa’s psychoanalyst, Chiba Atsuko is also a character of mental disease. The conversation between her mentor Shima Toratorah insinuates Chiba has suffered from depression from two years ago, and the recovery from depression induces the birth of Paprika, a new persona of her. Unlike Konakawa who sees everyone in his dream as himself, Chiba shows up in dreams in the avatar of Paprika. Although Paprika and Chiba are essentially the same person, they juxtapose distinctive and almost opposite personalities: Chiba is a prominent psychologist who is mature, serious and composed; Paprika appears in a younger, livelier girl who is more playful and frivolous.

Due to Chiba’s strong ego, she shows strong denial and negation to unsatisfactory events.  For example, whenever people mention or praise the achievement of Paprika, Chiba would be annoyed to hear the name and ignores the conversation. Chiba neither accepts nor appreciates the fact that Paprika is her separated self. Atsuko Chiba’s reactions manifest an act of denial according to Freudian theory of defense mechanism. To be precise, her case falls under the category of perceptual denial as the perceptual system simply shuts down the gateway to receive information from the environment to avoid any psychological pain. Also, Chiba hides her true heart with harsh words by mocking Dr. Tokita’s obesity in front of him, but at the same time, she always refers to Dr. Tokita as “the genius” or “genius boy” in an appreciative way when Dr. Tokita is not present. The type of defense mechanism displayed here is negation, which she allows the fact but rejects it at the same time. Her reactions may appear childish, but Freud argued that defense mechanisms are necessary as part of normal development because it unconsciously protects one’s ego.  (Cramer, 2006)

Atsuko Chiba and Paprika share memories, but due to the difference in personality, their reasoning and decisions branch off to greater differences. Towards the ending of the film, Chiba questions Paprika: “Why don't you listen? You're a part of me.” But Paprika repartees: “Have you ever thought that maybe you are a part of me?” (Kon, Paprika) The witty conservation and multiple appearances of blue butterflies can be a tribute to Chuang-tzi’s parable “the butterfly dream” in which the ancient Chinese philosopher Chuang-tzi questions whether it is him dreaming about a butterfly or a butterfly is having a dream about him. Their conversation raises the question of how the blurring the border of dream and reality would impact humans’ cognitions of the world. In Atsuko Chiba and Paprika’s case, it does not matter which persona hold a dominance of the spirit, the entity of Atsuko Chiba formulates her own perception of the world and recreates it in her dreams.

Chiba’s character growth is triggered by her change of attitude towards Dr. Tokita to whom she is too shy to show her admiration. When Dr. Tokita was engulfed by the dream world, Chiba prioritizes the task of saving him to catching the culprit, but Paprika suggests they should leave him alone and take back DC mini. Unlike the usual cold-blooded scholar, Chiba is behaving more like Paprika and rushed to save him. After Dr. Tokita gains his consciousness back, Chiba rested her head on his back and confesses: “You are impossibly interesting.” (Paprika) The persona Paprika merges with Atsuko Chiba and they transform into the giant girl who rescues the world from chaos and restores the balance between dream and reality. In the end, Paprika has disappeared as she has accomplished her goal of making Chiba accept her true self.

Chiba and Konakawa choose to confront their past trauma and concealed emotions and return to normality. On the contrary, the Chairman who is limited by his physical disability, covets eternality and perfection and embezzled DC mini to fulfill his ambition to rule the realm of dreams and thus control the reality. As a man holding significant power, the Chairman symbolizes control and self-will. However, the Chairman turns out to be the counterexample of losing control over the technology and his ambition. His worship in perfection and absolute authority is illustrated in the scene which the Chairman is reborn into a giant in the dream world and claims “I feel great. I am reborn. Look. I am standing. With my own legs. I am perfect. I can control the dreams, and even death Now, to make the cosmos complete I shall heal all deficiencies.” (Kon, Paprika) But he downplayed the influence and volition of whom he deemed to be his trivial subjects such as Osanai’s secret admiration towards Chiba, Paprika’s power, Konakawa’s awakening. The Chairman’s desire eventually devoured him: he has lost grip on the situation as well as the control on DC mini. A random roll in his dream mocks: “The conceit of the daytime residents is what the nighttime residents want. To come in carelessly is like a moth to a flame.” (Kon, Paprika) His ending serves as an allegorical warning and hinted the inherent limitations of mankind.

Paprika once points out “Don't you think dreams and the Internet are similar? They are both areas where the repressed conscious mind vents.” (Kon, Paprika) Sigmund Freud believes that dreams are a revelation of the repressed thoughts and emotions. Similarly, films are also a representation of the minds. In Satoshi Kon’s other work Millennium Actress, the film reflects the life of a famous actress Chiyoko Fujiwara in her movies. Chiyoko falls in love with a stranger painter who is leaving for Manchuria and leaves her only a key. For the rest of Chiyoko’s life, finding him has become her driving motive for everything she does: she joins Ginei studios for a chance to shoot in Manchuria; she becomes a respected actress, hoping her fame could reach to his hears. In her actress career, the roles she has played ranged from Geisha, samurai to astronauts. The plots of her films vary on a wide range, but her characters share stronog grit. All are constantly seeking, constantly running, and constantly protecting her beloved one. Chiyoko’s life parallels with her roles, and Kon’s excellent montage seamlessly connects the fictional film world with her action in the real world.

For Chiyoko, the plots of her films are her stories, her dreams, and in these dreams, Chiyoto is able to achieve her repressed desire of meeting the mysterious painter. In fact, the actual stories of her films may not be the same as how she presented them. Her subjective consciousness is eager to express her strong will, these fictional characters become Chiyoko own persona and manifested in her dreams.
However, unlike Atsuko Chiba or Detective Konakawa who vehemently denies a part of themselves, Chiyoko didn’t indulge or escape in her egotistical illusion but rather she has been aware of her unrealistic dream for the entire time. At the beginning of the film, an old Japanese lady cheated Chiyoko to drink a cup tea that curses her to experience the torture of love forever. Indeed, the rest of Chiyoko’s life is pivoted on her endless pursuit of her loved one. But instead of taking a victimized and passive female role that has been traditionally portrayed by the mainstream media, Chiyoko takes an active path with no regrets. At the end of the film, as Chiyoko is lying on a hospital bed and soon to be leaving the world, she dreams of her sitting inside a firing rocket and departing for the greater universe, she confesses to the audience and to herself: “What I really loved, is the part of me chasing him.” (Kon, Millennium Actress) Chiyoko’s projection of her persona onto her roles is not a sign of self-obsession, but an optimistic, brave and free spirit of a modern female.

As Paprika is analyzing Konakawa’s dreams, she makes an interesting observation about dream and films as “REM sleep that occurs later during the sleep cycle is longer and easier to analyze. If earlier cycles are, say, artsy film shorts later cycles are like feature-length blockbuster movies.” (Paprika) Inception would fit into the category of feature-length blockbuster movie, whereas Paprika and Millennium Actress would be better matches for artsy films. In terms of their art styles, Christopher Nolan’s version of dream world is well-constructed, lucid and flawless, but Satoshi Kon utilizes the unique advantage of animated film and created a fantastic, ridiculous and chaotic version of the dream world.

Kon presented the world a dazzling art project in solving the same question and ascended the question to a higher level. Just as the parade in Paprika, it functions as an agglomerate of people’s subconscious and the display of the parade signifies the hidden side of the society. Kon incorporated amazing details in this absurd yet glamorous parade. For example, as people join the parade, they are turned into animated commercial products such as refrigerators, televisions and cell phones and people shout out meaningless harangues that are worded similarly to commercials. Working class men with heads of cell phones blatantly take photos under young girls’ skirts. This agglomerate of consciousness exposes many aspects of the society which people are reluctant to discuss in reality. The sumptuous, psychedelic parade mirrors the chaotic, represses side of the society and the parade is assimilating its surrounding, suggesting the strong potential and influence of the mainstream media and subcultures.
On the contrary to Nolan’s agonistic response, Paprika gives a clearer and more affirmative answer. The dream world is a reflection of our minds and repressed thoughts, and more importantly, it is not any inferior to the reality. Understanding the persona and projections in the dream world enables further self-inspection and growth: Chiba was able to realize her divided ego going through stages from self-denial to total acceptance; Chiyoko Fujiwara projects her desire in her dreams for the pursuit of true self. Sigmund Freud writes: “To the dream ‘No’ does not seem to exist. In particular, it prefers to draw opposites together into a unity or to represent them as one”. (Freud and Starchey, 2010) The discrepancies in the dreams versus the reality exposes psychological issues of either individuals or the society. But we can still believe that the flawed but resilient hearts of human beings is capable of deciding our frame of mind and the functionality of the society with correct and subjective interpretations of ourselves.



Sources:
Whipp, Glenn. "Christopher Nolan on the Power of the People and Why '2001' Should Be Required Preschool Viewing." Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles Times, 04 Jan. 2018. Web. 02 Apr. 2018.
Ogg, Kerin. “Lucid Dreams, False Awakenings: Figures of the Fan in Kon Satoshi.” Vol. 5, 2010, pp. 157–174.,www.jstor.org/stable/41510962. Accessed 9 Apr. 2018.
Cramer, Phebe. Protecting the Self: Defense Mechanisms In Action.New York: Guilford Press, 2006.
Kon, Satoshi. Millennium Actress: Sennen Joyu.Widescreen presentation (1.78:1). Universal City, CA: DreamWorks Home Entertainment, 2003.
Kon, Satoshi. Paprika.Culver City, Calif.: Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, 2007.
Freud, Sigmund, and James Strachey. The Interpretation of Dreams.New York: Basic Books A Member of the Perseus Books Group, 2010.
