---
layout: post
title:  "Clannad Revisit"
date:   2021-11-29
categories: anime

---
Rewatching Clannad as a young adult is a weird experience. Naturally, you start to pick on different parts and details of the story. You get are moved by different characters and plots. At the end, it always comes down to cliché yet powerful theme of “clan”, as hinted from the title.

Ichinose kotomi’s parents were scholars in the field of string theory, studying how the parallel worlds exist and interact. This is the first time the creator is showing the audience the bigger picture of the story frame, marking a clear difference of this show with any other romantic high school comedy. The audience just assumed supernatural events will happen naturally in this show as early on as the first character heavy chapter on Ibuki Fugo. The brief explanation of the parallel world and the mentions of the “light” give away the audience almost a type of insurance -- we know reoccurring episode of the girl and the robot in the other world will put the puzzle together in the end. Although to be frank, the story of this other world is almost disturbing at one point to me compared to the main story. What made a difference in Clannad lies in the craft of a good happy ending.

The credit certainly goes to the wonderful script writer Maeda Jun back then his talent was still shining, but more importantly the amazing staff team of Kyoto Animation. It was an golden era of animation that our generation will take forever to get over and appreciate with our truest hearts. It was already amazing enough for Kyoto Animation to combine the high school part of the story with so many characters that had independent storylines originally in the game into a wholesome story, wait to see how season 2 slaps you in the face and hurt you with all the happiness and laughs you had for the high school chapter.

I hate to see people describing Clannad as a tearjerker, maybe the term comes with a negative innuendo to me personally as a brainless or purposeful, which not only interrupts the natural intention of storytelling but also filled with the cliché unnecessarily long, saddening background music, bad acting and filler episodes that are just made to make you sad. Watching it for the second time, it’s easier to spot Clannad had the intention as well, but it does an excellent job portraying how the main character grows out of his pain and loss that creates a genuine connection to the audience. For example, when Tomoya asks his daughter why she cries in the bathroom, she says that’s the only place she is allowed to cry, then Tomoya responds: “It’s good that you cry. Cry as you want. Sometimes you can’t physically cry when you if want to when you grow up.” The portrayal is so point on to both Tomoya’s character and his experiences because after so much unfortunate events happening to him, he grows numb of the pain. Of course, I admit the replaying of “Roaring Tides” is tiring sometimes. It makes my stomach cramp when it begins to play as the “Roaring Tides” only plays when the plot has a big downturn. But the accurate and unbelievably real character portrayal is rare in any anime, even now. So rather than calling it a typical tearjerker, I like to think the ability to bring the audience to tears is a gift, to expose the weakness of the inner world of the characters as well as the audience.

As I was watching Clannad for the second time, I noticed how strong and respectable the character of Furukawa Sanae is. We already have strong female characters such as Sakagami Tomoyo and Fujibayashi Kyou, even the dorm matron Misae, but Furukawa Sanae, as a mother, is on a different level. She is able to take on what Tomoya couldn’t without a word. When you live at an era that portraying women giving up their careers will be criticized without doubt, seeing Sanae quit her job as a teacher to take of her daughter rings a bell in my mind. Yes, it’s a bit old-fashioned, but this also requires so much love and courage. Plus, Sanae is also making a considerable income with the private tutor lessons, which is a good middle ground to settle for both her career and being the caretaker of her daughter. A woman is still allowed show their strength by contributing to family, this was the story back then, and it will always be a part of the story of womanhood forever.

The father-son relationship of Tomoya and his father has something unique to the East Asian culture. The lack of communication, the passive aggressiveness, and even the resolution, initiated by Tomoya’s daughter, is very typical in the East Asian patriarchic society. I’m glad to see the father and son finally reunite, but deep down I’m a bit disappointed because it came too easily and too typical.

I also liked how Maeda Jun makes the connection of the town to life and family, connecting the dots to a whole picture. The power of happiness moments from people and the town itself, as a whole, brings a second chance to the main character, and what should be done is done. It is a happy ending that came at great cost and depth. It will make you rethink the concept of community, human connections, and time.

Whenever I think of Clannad, I will always think of the prolonging aftertaste of bittersweetness. (And Kyo in the gym equipment room)
